---
title: A Brief Study into Free Will
author: Fahad
layout: post
icon: fa-lightbulb-o
---

Imagine a scenario in which Alice wants to go to the library on a certain day. To go to the library first of all Alice has to at some time in the day or any of the previous days think of going to the library, after that Alice has to actually act on the thought. The debate around free will deals with whether the action and the actual thought behind some action is actually of one’s own volition or not, that is to say whether that thought and action were made Freely without any influence or external factors. In this section we will discuss about the importance and the difference theories and points of views surrounding free will

### Importance

Let’s take our example of Alice wanting to go to the library again. As I have mentioned already one needs to have thought about doing something before acting on it. Now if Alice wants to go to the library she would need to have decided to go to the library before actually going there, and she would decide this based upon a number of factors, such as upcoming quizzes or exams. Using the faculties of mind, she would make a rational decision to go to the library. Now this decision, this thought, which precedes the action is actually necessary for the action itself.  We can say that free will, volition, is needed for an action. Now if there is no free will, that is to say one is not free in making a decision to do an action, then one can say that the action is not free to begin with. Now that we have established that Free will is necessary for free action, let’s go into detail and see what free will actually is.[6]

### Definitions

Thomas Hobbes an English philosopher from the 16th century defined a free agent as follows [7]

“A free agent is he that can do as he will, and forbear as he will, and that liberty is the absence of external impediments.”  

If we were to consider the definition provided by Thomas Hobbes of free will, we will realize that it might be incomplete. As an example let’s go to the familiar case of Alice wanting to go to the library, As we have established she would need to make a rational decision of going to the library. But let us assume that she has already made the decision, but as she heads out she realizes that her car is out of gas, and the public transport is not working. Now although she had willed it, of her own volition to go to the library but external circumstances prevented her from going to the library. According to Hobbes, Alice would not be a free agent, and wouldn’t have free will. 

David Hume a Scottish Philosopher had this to say on free will [8]

“..power of acting or of not acting, according to the determination of the will: that is, if we choose to remain at rest, we may; if we choose to move, we also may.… This hypothetical liberty is universally allowed to belong to everyone who is not a prisoner and in chains” 
As we see that Hume, with his “ everyone who is not a prisoner and in chains”  much like Hobbes ignores some aspects of the free will. In the example above, Alice would still not have free will according to Hume. The main problem with the above definitions is that the respected philosophers are not making a distinction between freedom of action and freedom of will. For them both are one and the same to some extent.
We have established in an earlier section that freedom of will is necessary for freedom of action, but is the inverse also true? Is freedom of action also necessary freedom of thought. The simple answer is No. Consider the example of Alice going to the library, although she had thought about it, she had willed it, she had tried acting on it but was ultimately not successful. Alice choose to go the library, she had already willed to go there. One can say that in this case Alice had free will but not free action. External impediments might prevent a person from acting on their decision but they do nothing to your liberty of taking a free decision without any biases.

Let’s look at a definition from the Stanford encyclopedia of Philosophy which covers more ground. [9]

“Free Will” is a philosophical term of art for a particular sort of capacity of rational agents to choose a course of action from among various alternatives.”
Here in this definition, we see that it says the “capacity of rational agents to choose a course of action from among various alternatives“. This part is particularly interesting because it doesn’t mention the realization of the action, but rather just to the selection of an action among alternatives. 
Let’s try applying this definition to our ongoing example of Alice going to the library, According to this definition Alice would need “various alternatives”, here Alice had the choice to go to the library or to stay at home. She would also need to choose among them, and in our example she choose to go to the library. So according to this definition our Alice would have free will even if there was no way to realize that action.

### Moral Responsibility

Free will is necessary for free action But is it also necessary for moral responsibility?. Let’s say Dave is driving a car, and while he is driving the car he hits someone on the road. Now if Dave hit the person on the road of his own volition, then dave would be responsible for his action, because his decision(be it criminal negligence or a personal vendetta) has led to an action. Now on the other hand, if someone sitting in the back seat was holding a gun to Dave and coerced into him running over the person on the road, then he would not be morally responsible for his action, as he would not have a say in the situation, he wouldn’t have a various alternative to choose from. From this example we can conclude that if a person doesn’t have free will then, he is not morally responsible for his actions [6]. There are certain exceptions to this rule as we will see in later sections of this paper. 


### Religious Views
Free will has been talked to an extent in most religions. Most religions have the concept of a supreme being who has created the world and all the human beings in this world. This supreme being is omniscient, who knows everything that has happened in the past and that has to happen in the future. This line of thinking leaves very little leeway for free will to exist. 


### Predestination


Major Religions in the world have a concept of predestination where they say that everything that has to happen in the future has already been decided by God. There is a strong concept of fate, and every soul in the world has a fate. Fate refers to the predetermination of a course of events. This can be thought of as religious determinism. Free will does not bode well with predestination, because if everything has been already decided then that means that there is no free will, no alternative actions to choose from. Free will along with predestination leads to a paradox, because being omniscient, that is to be all knowing, goes directly against free will.
Maimonides, a Jewish philosopher said this on free will in theology [10]

“*Does God know or does He not know that a certain individual will be good or bad? If thou sayest 'He knows', then it necessarily follows that [that] man is compelled to act as God knew beforehand he would act, otherwise God's knowledge would be imperfect.*” 

The argument breaks down to the fact that Omniscience and Free will are contradictory. Because as mentioned before there would be no alternatives. In simple terms,God knows that a certain action is to be taken on a certain day, then that has to happen otherwise God would not be omniscient. And if that were to happen, then that would mean that it was the only action that could have been taken. So we can see here that Free Will is incompatible with most major religions.


### Philosophical Arguments

Many philosophers have argued about free will, they have come up with different theories and arguments regarding free will. There are three major schools of thought regarding Free Will. They are as follows 
 Compatibilists
 Incompatibilists 
 Pessimists
But before we look deep into them we need to explore a very important concept surrounding all of these schools of thoughts and of course free will.

###  Determinism

Determinism or causal determinism to be more specific is the thesis which says that everything can be determined. That is to say that the future can be determined from the past. In determinism If we know the state of the world at a certain period of time, and we also have all of the rules of the universe then If we apply the rules to the state, then we should come to a unique future. Determinism plays a very important role in the debate around Free Will because if the thesis of determinism is true, and there is a unique unchangeable future then that would mean that there is no Free will, as it will violate the alternative actions requirement of free will. 

To put Determinism more formally we can say [6]
Imagine a proposition P, which tells us how the universe was a million years ago
Imagine another proposition L, which tells us about how the laws of nature work
Determinism formally states that a Conjunction of P and L entails a unique future.
Now that we know what determinism is, one tends to assume that determinism and predictability are one and the same. But it is not always the case as we have shown in the next section

### Predictability with Determinism

Suppose you have the complete laws of nature and the complete state of the universe at a certain point, you can determine what is to happen, but you can't always predict something. This is due to the fact that you need to do your prediction in advance, before the actual event has to happen, otherwise it wouldn’t be a very good prediction. 
Let’s consider this thought experiment you ask Alice to predict the state of a light bulb at 1200 hours, but she has to do it at 1150 hours, 10 minutes before the actual event is to happen. She doesn't know how how the bulb works, all she knows is that the bulb will be turned on at 1200 hours. 

You give the entire perfect knowledge of the universe at Time = 0 to Alice and you also provide all of the laws of the nature and the universe to her. You impose one condition on Alice that she has to give her answer using another bulb, incase the bulb will be on at 1200, Alice has to turn her bulb on at 1150, and in case it is turned off at 1200, she has to keep her light bulb off. Alice thinks that she has got this in the bag, She makes a decision at 1150, sits back and waits for the clock to strike 1200. Little does she know that you have a light sensor inside of your bulb. At 1200 hours, your light sensors senses whether there is light outside, if there is light outside, the bulb turns on, and in case there is no light, the bulb remains turned off. In this scenario Alice would never be able to predict the result of the light bulb, but she would be able to determine it. [11]

Such a device is called a frustrator, and some philosophers say that human beings are frustrators in the universe. Which causes predictions very hard if not downright impossible.

### Compatibilism

Compatibilist are people who think that Free Will is compatible with determinism, these people are also called soft determinists. In a nutshell what they say is that if an action is self determined then it is also Free [6]. They also say that even if all of the decisions by a certain person are determined, even then some of them can be thought of as Free. One of the most famous and interesting arguments for compatibilism is Frankfurt’s argument. 

### Frankfurt’s Argument

Most philosophers believe that the requirement of alternative options is necessary for moral responsibility, and thus free will. Henry Frankfurt, an american philosopher showed that this is not always the case. He gave examples to prove that alternative options were not necessary for moral responsibility. To give a better view of how this argument works let’s look at an example. [12]
Dave is going to a car dealer to buy a car, he has two choices. To either buy a car from BMW or to buy a car from Volkswagen. He sleeps on the decision. But while he is sleeping a team from Volkswagen breaks into his house and plants a chip in his head to make him buy a Volkswagen car. The chip is only activated if Dave thinks of buying a BMW. Now Dave wakes up in the morning and goes and buys a Volkswagen car, without ever thinking about BMW. So the chip is never activated.

In the example mentioned above, we see a scenario where there are no alternatives but the agent is still morally responsible for his action. And one can say that his action and decision is free even when there were no alternative choices. And indirectly determinism where there are no alternatives is compatible with determinism. Cases like the one mentioned above are known as Frankfurt cases. 

### Incompatibilism

Incompatibilism is the school of thought that believes that Free Will is incompatible with determinism. The proponents of this school of thought say that for free will to be truly free, there should be no determinism in the world. There are multiple types of Incompatibilists which are listed as follows [6]
Hard Determinists
Libertarians
Hard determinists are people who say that determinism and free will are completely contradictory, they believe the thesis of determinism and reject free will due to it. Libertarians are people who believe that determinism is false and that some choices are actually completely free. One thing common among incompatibilists is that they believe that if the theory of determinism is falsified then free will might actually be possible. Many proponents of incompatibilism have given different arguments to support their belief, here I am going to mention two such arguments.

### Consequence Argument

Van Ingen a dutch philosopher in his essay on free will says the following  [13]

“*If determinism is true, then our acts are the consequence of laws of nature and events in the remote past. But it’s not up to us what went on before we were born, and neither is it up to us what the laws of nature are. Therefore, the consequences of these things (including our present acts) are not up to us.*” 

Van ingen based his argument on the premise that we do not have power over the past or the laws of nature, and because of that we are unable to do anything about the past.  Now we can do nothing about the future either, as the future is determined by the past and the laws of nature. This argument is also a variation of the standard argument given by many incompatibilist. 

### Origination Argument

The second argument for incompatibilism is the origination argument, the origination argument exploits the fact that for a person to have free will in a certain action, he or she needs to be the originator of that action. But in case of determinism that is not the case. The internet encyclopedia of philosophy gives the origination argument in the following form. [6]

An agent acts with free will only if she is the originator (or ultimate source) of her actions.
If determinism is true, then everything any agent does is ultimately caused by events and circumstances outside her control.
If everything an agent does is ultimately caused by events and circumstances beyond her control, then the agent is not the originator (or ultimate source) of her actions.
Therefore, if determinism is true, then no agent is the originator (or ultimate source) of her actions.
Therefore, if determinism is true, no agent has free will.
This argument very logically breaks down as to why free will is incompatible with determinism. To make the point clearer let’s take our familiar example of Alice. Let’s say that Alice has decided to go to the library, For Alice to have free will she needs to be the originator of her decision. But the thesis of determinism states that everything is determinable, and if everything is determinable then that means that alice is not the originator of her decision of going to the library, because her decision is influenced by what happened in the past, which she cannot change. Hence she does not have free will.

### Pessimists

Pessimism [6] is the school of thought that believes that free will is not possible with determinism nor indeterminism. These people believe that one cannot just give the credit for a choice or a decision to free will, because they think it might have been just due to chance.
Let’s take the example of alice going to the library, the thought about going to the library, was it really her own thought or was it just some thing that came into her mind due to some random event happening in the world. More formally they say that with determinism, free will is not possible, but indeterminism doesn’t help either because even with indeterminism chance could be involved. And even then the action and decision won’t be free.

### Libet Experiment

Libet experiments are especially interesting in the context of Free will because they show that an action might not actually come from the conscious mind but from some unconscious activity in the brain.
Libet performed the experiment as follows [14]. He first of all hooked up people with an EEG machine. And starting measuring their brain activity via electrodes. He asked subjects to move their hands when they felt like it, he asked them to record the time when they made the decision to move their hands. The brain activity measured by the RRG machine was 100s of ms in advance to the time recorded by the participants. The experiment showed that the brain started before anything else.

After this experiment was performed many philosophers argued that this experiment showed that free will was an illusion, as the actual action started from the unconscious mind without the actual decision by an individual, and it wasn’t until later that conscious acknowledgement of the decision was involved. Libet said that while the decisions were initiated from the unconscious mind, there was still time for a veto from the conscious mind, to stop the decision from transforming into an action.
  
### Conclusion

 Free will is an exteremely dense topic, The question of free will is a question that I myself have asked myself a thousand times, but do we really have free will? I don’t think so, If we are to believe the thesis of determinism, then there is very little space for free will to exist. But again that does not mean that one is not morally responsible because of the so called frankfurt cases, which prove that one can still be moral responsibility even if there are no alternatives, even if there is no free will.


#### References

1. Swinburne, Richard, Body theory, “Personal Identity: the Dualist Theory”, pp. 319
2. Umar Ship Of Theseus : What Does It Take For an Object To Persist Over Time? Umar- https://inquestformeaning.wordpress.com/2013/09/28/ship-of-theseus-what-does-it-take-for-an-object-to-persist-over-time/
3. Wikipedia contributors. (2017, December 11). Cell death. In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 01:46, February 27, 2018, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cell_death&oldid=814971375
4. Locke, John (1689), On Identity and Diversity ,An Essay Concerning Human Understanding
5. Hume, David (1739), Of Personal Identity, Treatise of Human Nature, Part IV, Book I
6. Timpe, K. Free Will. Retrieved December 20, 2017, from https://www.iep.utm.edu/freewill/ Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
7. Hobbes, Thomas and Bramhall, John (1999) [1655–1658]. Hobbes and Bramhall on Liberty and Necessity, ed. V. Chappell. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
8. Hume, David, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding
9. O'Connor, Timothy, "Free Will", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2016 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2016/entries/freewill/>.
10. Maimonides, Moses (1996). The Eight Chapters of Maimonides on Ethics (Semonah Perak.im), edited, annotated, and translated with an Introduction by Joseph I. Gorfinkle (New York: AMS Press).
11. Wireless Philosophy, 24 Mar. 2013, PHILOSOPHY - Metaphysics: The Problem of Free Will, URL = https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iSfXdNIolQA&.
12. Wikipedia contributors. (2017, December 31). Frankfurt cases. In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 01:46, February 27, 2018, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frankfurt_cases&oldid=817861201
13. Van Inwagen, Peter (1983). An Essay on Free Will. Clarendon Press. ISBN 9780198246244
14. BBC Radio 4, 7 Nov. 2014, The Libet Experiment: Is Free Will Just an Illusion?, URL = https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OjCt-L0Ph5o


*I wrote this essay as part of the requirement for a really fun seminar called Scientists and Ethics at the Technical University of Munich in February 2018*