---
title: Giving Up
author: Fahad
layout: post
icon: fa-lightbulb-o
---
"Why did he even try", he asked himself. He was sitting in the train going from nowhere to somewhere. He was sad and felt dejected. The universe was wrong, the signs fabricated. But his life was pretty prosaic before all of this. It is said that only the bravest of the brave venture into the unknown. He wasn't brave, he already hated himself for trying.

The train passed through the hills over a river. He looked out onto the river so calm, so serene and peaceful. He did not think of himself as a misanthrope but it seems as though he was quickly becoming one. Everyone said that it was stupid that he was stupid for thinking about an impossibility. But he thought about it anyway, he tried so very hard, to no avail.

A cold wind blew across his face, he quickly closed the window. It was always cold at this time of the year. He recalled the day that he decided he was going to try, the enthusiasm was infectious. By saying everything and nothing at all, there in his cold unfeeling heart, there was warmth. It was as though some one had kindled the fire of passion within him. It felt like a phoenix had cleansed his soul through its tears, like the song of halcyon so calming, yet so incisive, that he decided to do what he did.
It did not matter now as he had lost the war and he decided that he wasn't going to try anymore. The train came to a stop.

His train of thought continued; To do or not to do, to be or not to be. Western philosophy always allured him, but it seemed that all of the books he had read had no answer. Rather they had the answer but not the one he was looking for.

To give up, to never look back and forget everything, this sounds so hard, and it feels hard too, but the painful truth of reality is that it is one of the easiest things to do. But he did not want to forget. This made everything so much harder. He hated feeling this way. He wanted it to stop, he wanted to hate everything. But he did not, he did not want anyone or anything getting hurt or broken due to his actions or his inaction.

Everyone was getting off, and it was his time too. He got up, left the train station. Forever leaving the place that gave him so much hope and so much pain. He was now a nobody in the middle of nowhere. A new beginning, the nascent flame flickered as the hope of a new life reemerged.
