---
layout: post
title:  "Insanity"
author: Fahad
---

To express yourself when even the notion of expression is forbidden. To chose one thing over the other,to be someone. All of these are notions of an insane mind. To give up, to get up, to begin again. To try doing something you want to but fail. To be the one who always wins, to the one who always loses.

The darkness creeps in. To know something you don’t want to. To know, to know, to know. Awareness is such a fickle thing. To feel, everything and nothing at the same time.

You’re 11, standing on the corner of a street. I see. I know, like I’ve always known.

You’re on a small train in a resort away from the city, I am there too. I am 13. I see you. I know you.

You’re 15, angry. Because of an asshole. I remember. I see, I know.

As you put together the little things in your room. I was there, I see. I know that poster, I’ve seen it a thousand times.

You grow older, I still see you.

But then one day. You’re alive. Standing. Speaking. Breathing.

But then you disappear again.

I still know. I’ve always known. I saw it all. The happiness, the sadness, the pain.

You’re crying again. I know it. Don’t cry. It gets better.

Then you’re there, you’re sad. I see you. You’re scared.

You disappear again.

You’re happy, it’s here. Everything. Then it’s gone.

The pain, is back. It burns, it burns. I felt it too. It woke me up, miles away. I can’t make it go away.

I see it. I don’t want to.

But I do. I am sorry.

But it gets better.

But now nothing is here.

I still feel, I still see. I know.

But I don’t want to.

Anymore.

